Hey, everyone. Welcome to Talk Python to Me. It's great to have you all here.
Rit, Brant, Pablo, and Mark, it's going to be super fun to speak with all of you about
Python 3.11. So, before we get into it, I guess, just real quickly, I know some of you
have been on the show before, but not all of you. So, let's just do a quick introduction
about who you are and how you ended up here on the show.
Yarit, do you want to start first?
- Yeah, hi, I'm Yarit Kachriel.
I'm a Python core dev.
And earlier in the week,
we streamed the release of Python 3.11.
And on the back of that,
Michael just invited us all here for chat.
- Fantastic, yeah.
That was a great live stream,
and we'll talk about that for sure in a second.
But, Brent, welcome back.
- Hello, my name is Brent Bucher.
I have been a core dev for like two years now
and I work with Mark and Yurit
on the Faster CPython team at Microsoft.
- Right on.
- And I was on the show like a month ago.
- Yeah, you were talking about the Faster Python stuff,
which we'll touch on again.
- Hello, I'm Pablo Galindo.
I'm the infamous release manager.
I release Python 3.11
and you can redirect all your complaints to my email address.
No, please don't do that.
So I'm a CPython core dev.
I'm also serving this year and last year
on the Python steering council.
And I also released my effort Python 3.10 and 3.11,
which is now the best version of Python.
Download it today.
Apart from that, I do a bunch of parser stuff.
But now we are not talking about that here.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Well, welcome.
Mark, welcome back.
- Hi there.
I'm Mark Chan.
I'm the tech lead of the Faster CPython team.
I work with Eric and Brandt,
and I've been a core dev for some number of years,
I don't recall.
- Yeah.
You've been spending a couple of years working
on this Faster CPython thing,
and very excited to see some of the fruits of those labors,
starting to show up and get in the hands of everyone
with this release.
Yeah, it's good to have the stuff out actually in public and in people's hands.
It's really rewarding to know that stuff you're working on is actually used and used by a
lot of people.
Yeah, that's, that is totally true.
It's it's one thing to build software.
I mean, just by itself, but it's fun.
But all of you, all of you are working on code that touches so many people.
Think about there's layers, right?
The second layer is how many people use Python?
Many, millions, millions.
Does anyone know a reasonable estimate of this number?
- I think some, I don't remember who came with the number,
but I think they were estimating like six million
Python developers, something like that.
I mean probably it's between zero and a million, let's say.
- Yeah.
So that's a massive impact,
and also maybe nervousness about pushing code out
to that group.
But then, those people build software for others, right?
If you're using Instagram or using YouTube
or other things, right?
It's also having massive knock-on effects there.
So thanks for putting all this together.
Thanks for improving the tools that we all get to use.
So yeah, big news.
The big news is that Python 3.11 is out
And as Iritz had said, you all live streamed that release.
So here we're all together,
we're having an awesome chat about the features
and what people can do to take advantage of it
and why they might care about new features
and wanna learn them.
But there you did a little bit of that,
but also Pablo, you actually step-by-step
did the release of CPython mostly live, right?
- Yeah, I did.
It was, except the boring part.
(laughs)
This is something that I started last year
because apparently I didn't have enough things to worry,
and I decided to make my life even more difficult.
I'm an expert on that.
Quite proficient.
- I'm also an expert.
I'm very bad at doing too many things.
- You could be a release manager.
It's the only requirement.
(laughs)
So yeah, the idea is that the kind of releasing Python
It's a process that is quite complicated.
It's also quite boring.
So it's not like you need to have a galaxy brain kind of thing
to do it.
But it's just a lot of steps, and it's very easy to do it
wrong.
And it's very unglamorous.
So I said, oh, wow, I'm sure people really
would like to see a very unglamorous process happen
in life.
And then I said, let's do it.
And I asked around, and I was surprised about how many people
enjoy unglamorous processes.
And then I did the release of Python 3.10 beta 1,
which turned out to be much funnier than I thought,
because we just broke GitHub.
That happened live.
Yes.
I also added that--
Was that when you imported all the issues
and did that migration, or was that separate?
You will think that that is a good candidate, but no.
That was not the thing that broke GitHub.
We renamed master domain on the CPython repo,
and the whole GitHub platform was down.
What about that?
Wow.
Yeah, you can see those Ruby workers really struggling
with the renaming and all those forks.
I think we were the, I don't know,
someone at GitHub may confirm this,
but I think we were the first big project
to do the renaming and something went wrong.
And it was very funny because I literally said,
"How funny will it be if now I get a 500?"
There you go, a 500 on the screen.
Yeah, yeah, it's recorded.
Someone actually recorded that clip.
[laughter]
Yeah, so I said, "Wow, man, this has been such an exciting thing
that I can break such a big project.
Let's do it more."
So I decided also to stream the 3.10 release itself.
And I said, "Well, technically, the final release
is even more boring and longer,
so that is actually probably not going to be even something
that someone wants to see."
So I said, "Okay, let's not do it alone."
So I invited a bunch of friends and core developers
so they can actually talk about the things that they worked on
the Python 3.10 release and brand I needed were there
so that they can probably tell you how they found out.
But apparently it was something that a lot of people enjoy
because it's not only an opportunity to see how the sausage is made
because I was just explaining all the commands and all the phases and whatnot.
and whatnot, but when something became very boring,
then Brand and I were there to save the day
and explain the cool things they work on,
which is a very good opportunity
because when is the last time you could hear
the author of the feature that you love
talk about the feature that you love?
That is fantastic, and it happened.
- Not only did it happen, but as they were explaining
the feature that they built,
the action of it being delivered to the entire world was happening.
It was all coming together in a pretty awesome way.
Exactly.
And I could only do-- just to be fair also,
and where credit is due-- I could only do that because the first time I
did the live thing, I was also pushing all the buttons
and at the same time doing all the video stuff with-- I don't know what
is the software to do the stream, but whatever.
And the second time, we used the help of the Python Discord team,
which are fantastic, and they help us a lot.
They have this fantastic UI,
where all the questions that were asked on the chat
are shown on the screen, and we couldn't use it.
Do you know why?
Because Facebook, or now Meta, decided to break DNS globally.
What an incredible feat, just in time.
So what I'm learning is if we need some sort of big cloud global outage, you all just need
to lie.
Just call Pablo.
Yes, exactly.
Just hire me today.
So yes, now we were like two big outages on Python release.
You know, there is only a line that passes through two points, but it was a good statistic
already.
So we said, what else can we break?
So there you go. We decided to do the 3.11 release again.
And Mark was there as well,
which increases the probability of things being broken by a lot.
[LAUGHS]
Sorry, Mark, I had to do the joke.
And he also fixes them, so it's fine.
And nothing broke, so kudos to Mark.
Everything thanks to that. And we did the release.
So we did the same thing. We explained the whole thing
so people could see from the authors themselves,
like why all the switches are very cool,
and I did the non-boring parts of the release.
Then we have a bit of some dramas in backstage
because my JubyKey that I used to sign release broke,
and I freak out quite a lot.
But I thankfully have a backup JubyKey,
so nobody had -- yeah, yeah, so crazy,
because if I didn't have that,
then I would have to stop the whole thing.
But we didn't have to do that. It was just backstage.
So, yeah, quite exciting.
nothing broke except my UVK.
I suppose that's the third thing that broke.
It's not a global, you know, software,
but I still mourn it is here.
- Yeah.
It served you well, but now it's,
it gave its life for Python 3.11.
- Too much power.
Like 3.11 was too powerful.
It just broke it.
- This is a dangerous job that you got.
- Yeah.
- But you've handed it off, right?
This is your last time, last main release.
Yeah, I need to do the security and bug fix releases, but I don't need to do the ones that you need to chase people down and ask for cherry picking.
There was a bunch of things of the release that were quite boring.
Normally we release the previous version, before the final version there is something called the release candidate,
which is the last version that people need to try out before we do the final release.
And ideally that is the last version that we publish.
Normally, it means that you publish from that commit.
But this was not the case.
This is the first release that had
130 something commits on top of that,
and then I had to painstakingly cherry-pick.
It was not fun, but I did that before the release,
it's like two hours because you need to fix conflict and things like that.
Yeah, very boring.
But yeah, I started the stream with that already done, so it was fine.
>> Yeah, fantastic. Now, before we get into all the features,
And I want to maybe just talk a little bit about some of the tools for actually doing the release.
And maybe, Arit, to start with you, is what does 3.11 mean for you all?
Getting this out, what does that mean for the Python community from your perspective?
Well, 3.11 is a huge release.
There's a lot packed into it compared to the last few releases.
There are new features, there's the performance work, it's just massive changes internally,
it's just a huge release.
Personally, I started working on Exception Groups about two years ago, so for me, it
almost feels like finishing another PhD or something.
It's a massive effort, and here it is, it's done.
- It was a big day Monday.
I had a bottle of champagne ready for the stream.
It was a celebration.
- Yeah, it was.
Brent, how about you?
- I'm really excited about 3.11
because I think there's something for everyone in there.
I think you'd be hard pressed to find someone
who doesn't want their code to run faster
and who doesn't want better error messages.
And then you have all these other improvements
on top of that.
It's really nice to see both these new features,
which are something that we get in most Python releases,
but also just the stuff that's there for everyone else
who just wants to upgrade Python
and just have a better experience all around.
- Yeah.
I totally agree with that.
- It's cool to see people's responses to that too,
because responses have been really, really positive,
which is another thing that I liked about the live stream,
'cause we did live Q&A and we had the chat
and everything going on.
When you're staring at the same code base for like a year,
you're like, okay, I'm pretty sure
that what we've done here is really, really cool,
but is it actually as awesome as I think it is?
Or have I just been staring at it for too long
and then released it to the world
and people are even more stoked about it than you are
and that's a really good feeling.
- Yeah, it is awesome.
Mark?
- Yeah, well, I guess I started on trying
to get Python faster 15 years ago, I guess,
early PhD time. - Yeah, with HotPy, right?
- Yeah, yes, that was a long,
this has been a long time coming.
So yeah, it's amazing to have it actually out
and starting to see the speed ups.
And obviously we're keeping working on it.
So it's pretty good.
- Yeah, fantastic.
You must be really proud because like you said,
you have been proposing this for a really long time.
You've had a lot of ideas and finally you've got
a group of people working on it.
And you're written brand,
you're all on the same team with Mark Guido.
- Yes. - Yeah.
and just making legitimate, serious progress here.
So you must be really proud to just sort of see this
actually go out the door.
- Yes, definitely.
- For me-- - Especially in--
- Go ahead, Brent. - The Python too.
It's really nice that we're able to, you know,
deliver this for everyone.
- Yeah.
For me, I see basically three things.
like you said, Brent, I see that obviously there's
these new features like exception groups, which are lovely
and make the language better.
But it also gets friendlier, especially for beginners,
but for everyone, of course, with the better error messages
and better reporting and tracebacks.
And it gets faster.
And so on all the axes that seem to matter,
it's really fantastic.
Okay, so let's dive in.
I just, you know, Pablo, let's go back just a little bit
to the release process,
'cause people got to watch you do it,
but they didn't actually, you know,
see exactly what you're typing on your screen
the whole time.
It was more of about a, like an event of it.
Sometimes your screen was up, sometimes it wasn't,
but there's an official PEP that talks about,
like, here's the recipe for doing this, right?
- That is correct.
is PEP 101 doing Python releases.
And that is a curious document, it's peculiar document
that talks about how it's done, but it's like,
it's kind of weird.
So the document is up to date,
like you can actually search PEP 101
and it will show you the thing.
So what is there is the actual process.
It's just, it also contains these weird sentences,
like if you search for it, there is a bunch of places
says stop, stop, stop, stop, stop, quite funny.
And that was, if I recall correctly, Larry Hastings.
He wrote those things.
And the idea is that he could search for those places.
And he knows that at that stage, he
needs to wait for something to happen or something.
And we left it there.
So there's a bunch of weird artifacts.
And it's full of bullet points, because at some stages,
you need to do some things and some others,
and things like that.
And it says, OK, if you're running a beta release,
then you need to do this bunch of things.
And if you're running an alpha release,
you need to do this bunch of things.
And I have done a state machine that
goes through the whole thing.
Because if you actually write this down,
it's quite-- how is this called?
The maintainability index of this process is insane.
It just rejects your thing.
It just doesn't merge.
And I said, yeah, I'm not doing this, really.
So one thing I did, which is the thing that I
was using at the stream.
My first work as a release manager is to say,
I'm not going to do this by hand.
And that is the vision.
And then I did this script that is on github/python/releasetools.
And it's my attempt at automating this process
as much as possible, which unfortunately still requires
a bunch of manual steps because that's life and things happen.
But it's quite automatic, at least things that are not final releases.
So Alphas and Release Candidates,
and now that we are in back-fixed releases,
it mostly runs automatically,
except that in the final release, everything fails
because that's the final release for you,
and then you need to fix things manually.
So I think you saw me executing a bunch of those fixes.
At some point, I added a division by zero
just to know that something was hit
and that was seen on the screen.
Because like, and people were like, division by zero?
Why do you need that to release Python?
I'm like, I don't know.
That's very complicated.
- I could have asserted false.
Come on, anything would have worked here.
- No, no, we divide by zero.
I'm a physicist, so that's what I do.
- Okay.
- Assert false is more precise.
- You studied black holes, right?
- Yeah.
- You were looking for some sort of like infinite
sort of thing that you divide by zero.
- I'm too tired for today.
Let's just collapse the universe, dividing by zero.
But Python was too friendly.
Instead of collapsing the universe,
it sold me an exception.
Quite nice.
All in 3.11.
No, no, I'm joking.
Anyway, so yes, yes, you can follow this pep
and just enjoy the whole process on its glory,
or you can see the script.
But yeah, it's quite verbose.
You can see that there's lots of places
when everything can go wrong and you can panic.
Now we know one more.
Apparently your YubiKey can break,
so that's something that can happen as well.
but it's quite annoying and that's the main job
of the release manager, go through this annoying process.
- Yeah, I see that there are some parts in here.
You should have a few more stops.
I should say, stop, stop, stop.
Make sure GitHub still works.
Stop, stop, stop.
Make sure Azure still works.
- Don't cry.
Don't cry at this stage.
Everyone is looking at you.
But yeah, the one thing that is known in this pub
is that you also are in charge in theory
this extreme abstract mandate, which is that you are in charge of the stability of the
release, whatever that means, that translates mostly in chasing people because they broke
things.
And another unfortunate event that we are trying to also fix a bit for the releases
is that most people turn to the release manager to solve problems.
So they say, "Hey, this person says that we should do X, while this other person says
that we should do Y.
we need someone to the side.
Let's reach to the release manager.
But the release manager is this guy on the corner.
He doesn't know shit.
So he's not the best person to fetch it.
But everybody was like, what do you think, Pablo?
So we merged this.
I don't know, man.
This is some enum things.
I don't know about this.
I have no context whatsoever.
- Your only concern is, will it still build and ship?
- Exactly.
It's like, yeah, what about these 2,000 lines of code
that sold this tiny bug?
It's like, well, maybe let's not merge that.
But yeah, we are trying to also redirect all of this
to the steering council, which also I am in the steering
council, so apparently I'm not going
to get rid of these questions.
I'm joking.
I enjoy all these questions.
But as a release manager, I don't.
So the key here is that the release manager should not
take unilateral decisions on the evolution of these things,
because it's just the release manager.
So the reason the steering council is--
>>You are the one who delivers the code.
You could sneak a feature in there.
Come on.
>>No, no, no.
I don't decide important things.
I just execute and chase people.
and I'm this annoying guy that says, "You wrote this, fix it."
But then, if there is some important decisions to be taken,
that's the steering council job, which is five people,
because one person shouldn't decide these things.
And this happens. Sometimes I say, "Hey, there is this PR
when people are asking what should we do,
and then this is my opinion as the member of the steering council,
and the other four members maybe they say,
"Well, actually, that's not a good opinion, so what about this?"
And we ended up in a much better place
because it was five people,
five persons doing a decision instead of one.
But yeah.
- Yeah.
Amazing.
Okay, so if people wanna follow along with the process,
they can check out PEP 101.
Let's see, let's keep over here.
You also talked about the Python build bot
that people can check out,
but I think maybe we wanna jump into our first feature.
As Arit said, there's a ton of features and things in here,
but there's also maybe some top level ones
that'll be really important for a lot of folks.
And, Ravit, you wanna tell us about your work?
You mentioned it before, the exception groups
and Exception Star. - Sure, yeah.
So this is kind of a major new feature that we added.
And the idea is that sometimes you have a situation
where you did several things
and maybe more than one of them raised an exception,
and now you need to report that there was more than one error
in whatever you did.
and what you did could have been a bunch of asynchronous tasks,
which is that was the use case that motivated this whole thing.
But there are also situations where you just iterate over a few things
and repeat them and accumulate exceptions,
and you want to report all of them.
And the PEP lists a bunch of examples of where this can happen.
So people, typically what they do is they'll take a list of exceptions,
wrap it in another exception, multi-error,
some other kind of wrapper and throw that,
and then you have to catch it.
And then you have to iterate over the list
and look at the exceptions,
but you don't have a method to handle the exceptions.
Like you have try accept, like catch these,
but not catch exceptions.
- Right, right.
Because in accept you might have like accept socket error,
or you might have accept, you know,
like file not found type of thing.
But if those both happen,
neither of those would run in Python 3.10, right?
'Cause it's some kind of weird wrapper
and it's not a socket exception,
it's not a file exception,
but it kind of contains both.
And so in a sense,
- Right. - I don't know.
- And then if you catch the wrapper,
and you do something with some of the exceptions,
you better not forget to raise the rest
because you're not handling them.
So, yeah, there are a lot of problems
when you try to work around this
and like what happened with Trio.
So Trio had multi-error, it would raise this wrapper
and it had to do a lot of complicated acrobatics
just to have some error handling.
So the motivation was, yeah, we have task groups
in Python 3.11, which are kind of like Trio nurseries,
kind of a structured collection of asynchronous tasks.
And task groups were on the cards,
They started like Yuri Sulevanov,
who was kind of maintaining async.io in the beginning,
he wrote a lot of async.io.
He wanted to add task groups since 2017, 2018,
something like that.
And what was holding it up was error handling.
There was no good way to handle errors.
So now we have accept star,
which is, which generalizes accept and works with groups.
So you can say accept star socket error.
and then it will just extract all the socket errors
from the group and give you those
and automatically re-erase everything else.
So that's basically the idea.
- Okay, so this is pretty interesting.
We have try, do your thing, and then accept star,
you know, one error type, accept star, another error type,
accept star, a set of errors potentially.
So what happens if I'm in this situation and say,
the first error type,
and maybe something from the third error catch clause
is thrown in one of these task group, exception groups.
- So each exception in the group will be handled
by at most one of the clauses.
So the first clause that matches its type will consume it,
and each clause executes once.
So if there are more than one errors of that type,
then what gets kind of bound in the except star full error
as E, what gets bound to E is a group of full errors.
So you get all the full errors in a group,
execute that clause and then move on to the next clause
with whatever is not handled yet.
- Interesting.
So it might run two of the clauses,
whereas in traditional exception handling,
it goes from top to bottom and it looks for an inheritance type of match and the first one that
matches that's it. But in this case with the star you could get multiple ones. I guess the star to
me when I look at this the star is reminiscent of args star where you have unpacking. Yeah,
yeah, yeah exactly. It's not exactly unpacking but it was it was kind of the intention to make it look
a bit like unpacking.
- Nice, yeah, this looks like a really cool feature.
You know, you talked about the task groups
and Trio and those things.
So when I saw this, concurrent errors
obviously come to mind,
'cause if I try to both write something to a database
and call a web service asynchronously
and I start both of those and they both crash
or multiple ones crash,
which error do you want?
The database error or do you want the API error?
You probably wanna know about both of them, right?
That's a real natural reason to bring these together.
But maybe you'd also list out some of the other reasons
that you might run into this.
Maybe you have some other ideas.
The example in the Socket module,
we have the CreateConnection function.
That function, I was showing it in the stream,
it iterates over all the configurations
that you could try to connect with,
and then depending on what's going on the other side,
hopefully one of them works.
But if none of them work, you have to report errors.
And what we do in Python 3.10
is we just raise the last exception.
So you don't know what happened really.
You only know why the last attempt failed.
You don't even know how many attempts we made
to connect to, how many configurations did we try.
So, you know, that was a longstanding open problem,
kind of, can we do better than just report the last error?
And we closed it.
We just added a parameter to that set.
- Give me a demo in the group.
- Another place that comes to mind is,
maybe you're all familiar with some of these retry libraries
like retry, but I think there's others as well,
where you put a decorator onto some function,
you say, try this multiple times,
and if it fails, do like some sort of exponential backoff
'cause maybe the server's overloaded, right?
Those types of things would be really great.
Like if it retries all the times it's supposed to
and it fails, it'd be good to get all the errors,
not just the last one or the first one
or whatever it decided it was gonna give you.
- Yeah.
- It's the kind of thing, exactly.
- Yeah, nice.
Hey, well, congratulations on getting that feature out.
That's great.
All right, what do we got next here?
I think also related to this,
I wanted to talk about this PEP 678.
- Yes, that was--
- You want to tell us about this one?
- Yeah, that's a very small and simple feature
that Zach Hadford Dodds wrote this PEP.
He was trying out exception groups.
He was the first kind of user,
even before the PR was merged, he was trying it out.
He was trying to integrate it with the hypothesis library.
So there you write a test and the library executes it
many times with different inputs and you get failures
in some of the inputs and you want to report all of them.
So Zach had an exception group, kind of an exception wrapper,
kind of like to your multi-error,
he had his own version that he built in his library.
And he could associate each exception he attached to it,
which input generated this error, which is very important.
You need to tell people what the input was
and what happened with it.
And he couldn't do that in a convenient way
with exception groups.
So we added this to base exception.
This is not a group feature.
It's any exception you can add strings.
You call add note, give it a string,
and you can call it as many times as you want
and add notes to the exceptions.
And they will appear in the trace back,
in the default trace back that the interpreter prints.
So that's all it is.
It's a very simple feature,
but it was received surprisingly well.
People kind of like it,
that you can enrich an exception after you catch it.
So you have the information that,
the error message and the type,
you decide that when you raise the exception,
but then sometimes when you catch it,
there's some more information,
some context, like what was I trying to do
when this error happened?
- Sure.
Yeah, 'cause often you'll see,
except some type, some exception type,
you'll deal with what you can,
but you can't really handle it there,
so you gotta raise it again.
And this is a place to add more information
without completely wrapping it, right?
- Right, exactly.
A lot of people have to chain it,
say this raised from that.
So there will be situations where
maybe you won't need to do that.
- Yeah, I'd love to see that go away.
I'm sort of template libraries and stuff in the web
all the time, I see like, there's all these different errors
and you gotta hunt through a bunch of stuff
to figure out what happened.
- Yeah, also think about, for instance,
I think this is super useful actually for end users even.
Like, think about that you're doing some query
to the database, right?
And then, I don't know, it may fail for six million reasons
and then you want to add what you're asking for, right?
So you add your query or your user or whatever,
because probably the exception that the Postgres thingy
that is underneath is not going to contain
your actual thing.
So this actually may save you hours, right?
Because in many enterprise environments,
you don't even have easy access to that.
So sorry to brought, so you cannot just go there
and see what's going on.
So it would be super cool that you say,
If something fails, I was trying to do this with this data
and with these things.
So if it fails, now you can know what's going on,
and you don't even need to log in, which is--
>>Yeah, that's a great idea.
Yeah, yeah, it's a great idea.
Or if you know, here's probably why this happened.
As a library developer, you're like, look, this is the error.
But here's a note.
This is probably because you didn't initialize the connection
before you called this.
So make sure-- another area where I see this could be useful
is I want to raise, like the example you have
in the docs is type error,
but it could also be value error
or some other built-in low-level type.
You know, like really this is just,
I wanna raise that error,
but it doesn't have a place for me
to put additional information.
And so I wanna kind of enrich that with more.
And so not just catch, add the data and then raise it again,
but actually I wanna use a base error type
that doesn't let me put more details in it
and then just raise that, right?
that would also work?
- I think so.
I mean, I think the intention was,
there was some discussions about using notes
in the interpreter and I pushed back on it
because I said, this is owned by the application.
The interpretation should touch the notes, you know,
'cause people can wipe out the notes,
they can change the order, they can do what they want.
It's the applications, at least the way I see it.
Application owns it, you put whatever context
you wanna put.
- Is there only one note?
When I say add note, does that set the note
or can I have a list of notes?
- It's a list of notes.
- Okay, got it.
- Yeah, and you can wipe it out if you want.
You can, it's just a list.
It's attached to the exception.
You can do what you want with it, really.
- Yeah, cool.
Okay, yeah, it's a great, it's a really great feature.
I mean, it's, I'm sure it was way less work
than accept star,
but it's also gonna be really valuable, I think.
- Yes, it's very simple, but it's, yeah.
- Okay.
- Yeah.
Brent or Mark, you guys got any thought about this
before we move on to the next?
- I think it's really cool.
I like it.
Great work, Gary.
- Indeed.
I think it is as well.
Actually, I'm really excited about it.
Let's go.
Talk about, let's talk about faster Python for a little bit.
So Mark, I had you and Guido on back on,
Wow, almost to the day a year ago.
We're off by November 1st, 2021.
So, not that long ago.
But yeah, let's talk a little bit about
the work that you're doing there.
I guess the headline is that Python 3.11
is 10 to 60, 10 to 50% faster than previous,
sort of on a reasonable range of applications.
Is that the story?
Yeah, somewhere between minus a few percent and plus 100, but it varies a huge amount.
I mean, if you've got some application that basically spends all its time in NumPy or
something like that, you're not really going to speed up at all. But if it's pure Python,
you'd expect it to be a good 40, 50 percent faster. But it depends.
Right. That's a good point because a lot of people do make Python faster by writing C or Rust or
other languages and at that point it's out of your hands.
We're looking hopefully for 3.12 to start looking at the
interface between Python and C code so we should speed up code even there's
quite a lot of C code. We won't spend up the time spent in the C code
in doing the actual work in the C code but there's still quite a lot of
marshalling of data that happens and hopefully we'll streamline that.
The existence of C extensions is in some ways limits our
opportunity to speed things up, but it's also why Python is so popular in the first place,
or one of the main reasons. So definitely need to acknowledge it.
Yeah, absolutely. So, Brent, I'll definitely have you talk about the specializing interpreters,
but Mark, maybe give us a rundown of some of the things from your plan that made it in here. I know
some were aimed for 3.10, but they didn't make it until here, right?
Yeah, so the whole thing, oh, that original plan I put up, that was more of a just to
get the discussion going sort of thing.
And it's basically more or less a year off.
So if you just shift everything one forward,
I mean, there was a lot of discussion on,
you know, speeding up the interpreter
in the first iteration and then looking more
to the data structures in the second thing
is much more jumbled than that.
We're doing sort of a bit of everything.
So obviously with, I was planning on, you know,
expecting a smaller team.
So things are being a bit shuffled.
So yeah, there's this specializing interpreter,
Obviously that's kind of key.
There's also quite a lot of stuff we've done
with data structures.
I mean, we shrunk the Python object.
So we've been, I mean, the Python object, you know,
has been shrinking for years.
I mean, I've got some numbers here.
So like in 2.7 and 3.2,
I like an object with just four attributes
would take 352 bytes on a 64-bit machine.
And for 3.11, we've got it down to 112.
And for 3.12, 96.
Well, before you get too excited,
There's only 32 in C++, so we've got a bit of way to go.
- Yeah, but it's going in the right direction for sure.
I'm sure some people out there listening just say like,
"Okay, well, it's half the size roughly,
and it's gonna be less than that."
So yay, we can use less memory,
but maybe you could talk a little bit
about how that affects things like L1, L2, L3 cache hits
and other sort of,
It's more important than just, I need less RAM, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
So there's two things that happen.
There's, yeah, there's things are faster
because the hardware is just happier.
If you pack everything together, it's in a high level cache.
So you're not getting these sort of long pauses
as you hit main memory.
And the other thing is just the data structures are,
because there's less of them, there's less indirection.
So for example, to load an attribute,
we can, we've got it down for basically an old,
older versions of Python, it was effectively five memory reads.
And they were dependent memory reads.
You have to read one before the next one and so on.
- Right, right.
Go to the object, find its dictionary.
Find the pointer that's in the dictionary
and then go to that, right?
- Yeah, yeah, they're very much that.
And that's down to more or less two now.
So, I mean, obviously there's still
interpretive overhead on that.
So it's not quite that much faster,
but it's getting there.
So yeah, there's a day structures and end of the frames,
the Python frames, every time you call a Python function,
we used to just allocate a heap object for the frame
and all this stuff would go in there.
And now they're all basically in a big contiguous
sort of block of memory.
So it's just bumping a pointer rather than allocating,
which is also faster.
And frames are just more anyway,
because of the zero cost exceptions,
which I think we mentioned on the release thing.
>> Yeah. Well, let's tell people about zero-cost exceptions.
>> Okay.
>> Zero-cost.
>> You shouldn't have to pay for
errors if you're not raising errors, right?
>> Yeah. That's the idea and that's why they're called zero-cost.
But zero-cost is in quotes in this.
The reason for that is that's the name it has got.
They're definitely not zero-cost.
The idea is that they're pretty low cost if you don't have an exception,
but they tend to be even more expensive if you do get
exception because you have to do more lookup. But the important thing here is that just there was
lots of runtime information we need to maintain and we don't now. So that again shrinks the frames
and just makes calls faster because calls in Python were notoriously slow. So that's one
thing we've sped up significantly. Yeah so the idea was in previous releases of Python, if you
just enter a try block even if it was successful there was a little bit of overhead to set up the
mechanisms of potentially handling the errors and the information you needed, right?
Yeah, and this wasn't just that, right? Yeah, I mean it's actually not so much that overhead as
just the space you had to put that data in had to be allocated every time you made a call,
in case there was an exception. And then we had to, it was massively over allocated to the amount
of space anyone ever needed. So just that was the big sort of advantage. Nice, yeah, this is
fantastic. You don't want to discourage people from putting proper air handling in their code.
Kharit, what do you think? I see your name on this feature here in GitHub.
What are your thoughts on it? - Yeah, I think it's cool.
It was a nice touch that Mark implemented it between when I wrote the prototype for
exception groups and when the PEP was approved. So that got in the way a little bit, but it was good.
I got intimately acquainted with zero-cost exceptions through that exercise.
Well, it's zero cost for some people.
Yeah, I tease Mark a lot about that, but no, I think it's a cool feature. And I mean,
I followed up on that.
We now have, after we removed that,
we still had a, I was talking about this on Monday,
we had a jump over the exception handler.
And then I told, wait a minute, there's a jump.
It's not zero.
You have to jump over the exception handler
if there's no exception.
So now we have, we did,
we identify exception handlers as called blocks.
And before we lay out the code of the function,
we put all the cold blocks in the end.
So now if there's no exception,
there isn't even an exception handler to jump over
that would be in 3.12.
So,
- Excellent.
- Yeah, this is
- You made zero cost even faster.
So now it's
- I made zero even smaller, yeah.
- It's asymptotically approaching zero.
- Yeah, so, but it's kind of nice that we have this notion
of cold blocks and hot blocks
and we can maybe do other things with it.
It's kind of nice that all the happy, the fast code
is kind of in the beginning of the functions
bytecode block.
And in terms of caches and all that, you don't have to,
I think it will bring a few benefits
beyond just not having to jump.
- Yeah, yeah, this is excellent.
It's a really great feature and pretty straightforward.
All right, let's, Brent, tell us about
the specializing adaptive interpreter.
That's a big deal.
You and I spoke about that about six weeks ago, I think.
- Yeah, yeah.
Basically, the headline is the bytecode changes
while it's running to adapt to your code,
which is really neat.
So it's kind of finding places where we can
do the same thing, but using less work
by like cheating a little bit.
But cheating in a way that is not visible at all.
So a good example is something like a global load,
or a load from the built-in.
So if I'm looking up like the len function,
that requires two dictionary lookups.
Every time I wanna look at the len function anywhere,
I first need to check the global namespace,
and that's gonna be a failed lookup.
Then I need to check the built-ins dictionary,
and that's gonna be a successful lookup.
So every time I wanna use len, or range, or list,
or any of those built-ins,
that's the cost that I have to pay.
But people don't change the global namespace that often.
And people change the built-ins namespace even less often,
or at least they shouldn't be changing it very often.
- I'm gonna make false true and true false.
Let's see what that does.
- Yeah.
And so, you know, you can make these observations
where it's like, okay, well, if the set of keys
in the global namespace hasn't changed since last time
this bytecode instruction ran,
then I know that that lookup's going to fail,
because if it failed last time and the keys are the same,
then it's going to fail this time as well.
So we can just skip that.
And same for the built-ins dictionary.
If we know that the keys in that dictionary haven't changed,
that actually means that the internal layout
of the dictionary is the same.
And we don't even need to look up
len in the built-ins dictionary.
We can reach directly to the last location
where it was before and give you that instead.
And so you'll often see in a lot of code,
as like a older code is a kind of a micro optimization.
Whenever someone was using a built-in
in like a very hot Python loop,
sometimes you'd see them like do this kind of quark trick
where they make it a local variable by saying like
len equals len or something like that
as part of the functions arguments
so that you turn it into a fast local load.
and what we've essentially done is, you know,
made ugly acts like that totally unnecessary.
- Yeah, you do that behind the scenes transparently, yeah.
- Exactly, and so that's just, you know, one example.
We've done tons of specializations for all sorts of things,
ranging from calls to attribute lookups,
to attribute stores, et cetera.
So yeah, no, it's a really, really powerful thing.
The PEP was, what was it, 569, I think?
Yeah, Mark wrote it.
It was 659.
- 659, almost there.
- Yeah, so this interpreter is Mark's baby.
He could tell you much more about it than I could.
- Nice, I do wanna give you a chance to give,
yeah, I just wanna give you a chance
to give a shout out about Specialist.
- Yeah, yeah, so this is why I was on your show
a couple weeks ago.
So looking at bytecode disassemblies is not fun.
And so one thing that's kind of cool
is if you upgrade to Python 3.11, you run your code
and you saw it got 10%, 20%, 30% faster,
you might be wondering, OK, where did it get faster?
What is faster about my code?
And so specialist is basically a package that I made.
It's pip installable.
It only works on 3.11.
And basically, if you run your code using specialist instead
of Python--
so you just type specialist myproject.py or whatever--
it will open a web browser and show you your code,
but color highlighted to show you
where the interpreter was able to specialize your code,
where it wasn't.
And that's really neat.
So you can see, oh, actually, these
are the attribute loads that got faster.
These are the places where my global loads are being cached.
That's what I mean.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
Yeah, this is a really cool project.
And it has some proactive features,
not just informational aspects, I think anyway.
You know, if you run a profiler,
it'll show you where your code's spending time.
But it doesn't mean you should go change everything
to make it faster.
You should look at like, oh, this loop,
or this one function is like the thing
that maybe we should think about
slightly changing the algorithm
or the way we do a loop or something.
And it's a little bit similar here
because the specializing adaptive interpreter
only specializes some things,
like it doesn't specialize floats interacting with ints
or those types of things, or I think division as well.
And so there's certain ways you might be able
to slightly change inside of a really hot loop,
make something a float ahead of time
if you know it's gonna be involved
in floating point operations, right?
- I think, yeah, the idea is that this is show us
how we can fix things so that you don't need
to mess with your code.
- I see, so this is in the future.
Okay, yeah, awesome.
- I would not necessarily encourage people
to start tuning individual bytecode instructions
in their code.
- Right.
- Dude, they already have limitations.
- They already have limitations, you don't see.
- You don't mean I need to,
I gotta take all those decimal points back out of my code?
No, just kidding.
- Yeah, I wanna get every single bytecode instruction green.
No, yeah, no, it is, you know,
some things will never specialize,
And that's just an artifact of programs.
But if we can specialize enough, and we typically do,
out of one line, maybe 20 bytecode instructions,
if four of them get specialized successfully and two of them
don't, generally that would still be fast.
- Do you know what you should do for April Fool?
Like, you should do a Python spline that
shows you the percentage of specialized instructions
in your code.
And people can fix the percentage.
So they can say, fail my test suite
if my code is not specialized more than 50%.
- If you de-specialize it, it's like a performance regret.
- Just don't say anything, drop it.
- Yeah, it's like a coverage thing.
Yeah, no, I was kind of thinking about this.
So Pablo can tell you more about this,
but his cool new tracebacks,
the whole reason Specialists is able to do these cool,
you know, column level highlighting of your source code
is because we do have that fine-grained position information
under the hood.
We kind of just piggybacked on that feature in order to give you that.
But I was kind of thinking another thing, another April Fool's project could be, you
know, column level coverage information.
So to get to 100% coverage, you have to cover every single column in your code.
Exactly.
I feel like people might take that too seriously.
Even the white space, all this white space is not covered.
Yeah.
You think you're intense by having branch coverage turned on, just wait until you have
column coverage turned on.
Yeah.
white spaces per line, so you got to call that a lot.
All right. I think that's a perfect segue over to
one of the most tangible contributions
from Pablo here. Maybe tell us about this
new fine-grained error locations and tracebacks.
This is fantastic. This will save people being
into buggers or rewriting their code
with tons of print statements to figure out what's going on, I think.
>> Yeah, thank you very much. We put a lot of effort
I'm not a big developer into this.
So this is, I don't even remember my PEP,
so I don't know, it's PEP something something,
and it has a horrendous name, as I always--
- 657 and, let's see.
- 657, thanks.
- Include fine grained error locations and tracebacks.
- Yeah, the worst name.
I think I was talking with Mark
in the Python Core Developer Spring,
and he was saying, what it means, fine grained?
Like, you know, like, is this very fine grained?
Like, so I think we are renaming the PEP to fancy trace bugs.
I think that's much better.
Anyway, so this is a project I worked together
with Batuhanta Skya and Omar Askar.
So kudos to them as well,
because they participated equally on this.
And the idea is that we were like,
we started this project to make, you know,
to improve the error messages in the interpreter
and the general experience,
Not only for people, because when people talk about this,
they normally refer to people starting to learn Python.
But to be honest, most of these things
also affect people that are experts.
I always say that when I implemented the suggestions,
I was the first one benefiting from them,
because I make a lot of typos.
And it says, oh, but you mean this.
So the idea that we have is that most of the time,
the lack of--
the interpreter shows you the position when the error happens,
but it's quite limited because most of the time,
people tend to have, due to Python flexible syntax,
a huge amount of complexity even in a single line.
In the pub, there is a bunch of examples,
like you access a bunch of keys in a dictionary
and some of them doesn't work or is not there or is none
or something like that, and then it fails.
Or sometimes you have several function calls
or several additions.
And it's quite difficult, and most of the time,
fixing these things involve going into a debugger, like PDB,
and then trying to inspect every single object and say,
"Okay, this dictionary doesn't have this key at this level."
And that sucks.
It's not good, because debuggers are cool,
but it's cooler not to use them, right?
And we thought, "What can we do here?"
And we arrived to this idea, actually,
also to mention everyone involved.
This was originally inspired by some kind of prototype
that Carl from the PyPi team made very long ago,
when he saw a kind of minimal version of this.
And then I said, "Okay, can we do this?"
And what we do now is that we propagate,
because the parser, our super cool spec parser,
knows the position of all the tokens and things like that.
So we are propagating that information
through the interpreter.
And we store this information now in code objects.
So a side effect of this PEP actually
is that code objects are slightly bigger,
although because code objects don't
tend to be a huge percentage of your application,
it doesn't really matter that much.
Maybe PYC files are a bit bigger,
but you have a lot of disk space, I'm sure.
And the idea is that we store this information
in code objects.
So when you raise an exception, we say,
"What is the instruction that raised this exception?"
And then once we know which is the instruction
that raised the exception, then we go and say,
"Okay, what is the position information
that generated this instruction?"
Because we propagated it, we know.
And then we can say, "Okay, here is kind of like the lines,
the columns that this instruction spans."
So that kind of allows us to underline the specific location.
But we go a bit further.
Sorry, go ahead, Michael.
- I was gonna say, this is super valuable.
The example you have in the PEP is,
you have a dictionary, you say bracket of key A,
and then the thing that comes back is another dictionary.
So you say bracket B, and then another dictionary,
bracket C, and then bracket D.
And in 3.10, the error's just like,
if one of those is none,
say none type is object is not subscriptable,
or maybe does not contain that key,
or some weird thing like that, but is it A, B, C, or D?
You have no idea.
You're in a debugger printing them out separately
or something, but now it just goes, nope, it's the C one.
That's, it's the third subscript one.
And that's just, just jump right to it.
- Yeah, also this error, non-type is not subscriptable.
It's kind of like, thanks for the info.
Like, it's like, you know, water is wet.
Okay, thanks.
It's not super useful.
No, exactly, so tell me when it's going to rain.
Anyway, we did the first version of this
and then we realized that there was some kind of like,
it was cool, most people really like it,
but especially for instance with the example
with the dictionary that has many dictionaries inside,
there was some confusion because it underlines
the whole thing and then, you know the order of operations
and also with complex mathematical expressions
like you do A plus B plus C and the last addition fails,
it needs to underline A+B+C because what happened is that it first added A+B and that gives you something
but then you added to C and what happened is that the last addition failed but that includes A+B
so you need to underline the whole thing. If you know the order of operations and I just underline
A+B+C you know that what will fail is the last one because that's the last one that is executed
but it's still confusing because you know specifically also with the dictionary people were saying yeah
"Okay, but you're underlining three keys here,
which is the one that failed."
I mean, you can learn by experience that it's the last one,
but it's kind of like, it was not a great experience.
So we went a step further.
So what we do is that once we know the kind of range
in the line that shows the problem,
we reparse that chunk of expression.
And then we know, okay, so we know now
that this expression has this AST.
And then we analyze the AST, and then we say,
"Okay, is this AST something that we can further, you know, improve the error message?"
Like, for instance, is this AST a bunch of key access in a dictionary or a bunch of attribute access
or a bunch of function calls or maybe binary operations?
And if it's the case, then we use a specialized, like, you know, underlying, I don't know,
tildes or squiggles or whatever it's called.
And, you know, the dictionary ones have this different one that marks which key access it was known.
the same thing for binary operations and things like that.
So we do this extra step at the end
that does a bunch of extra work, but it tries to improve
even upon the underlying line
just so we can offer even more rich information.
And I'm quite happy. I'm very pleased about this.
Sorry, Mark, but I think it's the best feature of 3.11.
Yeah, this is probably the second stream when I said this,
but it's true.
- Totally, totally true, 100% true.
So I don't know, I'm very excited about this.
I literally use this every day.
Today I was deploying Python 3.11, well, this week, sorry.
I was deploying Python 3.11 at Bloomberg
and something went wrong,
and literally, this thing saved my day.
This saved me to just log in to some forsaken machine
and understanding what's going on.
What about that?
So super cool, very happy.
I hope that everybody that uses this
and is happy, reach to us and say, I am happy.
Because normally people reach to us
they are not happy. They say, "Mmm, evil core developers, you break everything." But instead
of that, you should reach to us and say, "Nice." >> You should tweet at Pablo or something,
though. Don't open issues saying you're happy. >> Exactly.
>> Just tweet a couple of tildes, a few carrots, and a smiley face at him.
>> Exactly. Tweet at happy@python.org. I will take that email address.
But yeah, it's that. We improve it a bit further.
One of the things that happens is that,
you know, like, sometimes if the whole line is wrong,
because, for instance, this example you have there,
sorry, for the ones listening--
- What I had before, yep. - We have here some--
We are seeing some output, but that's not that. Don't worry.
I will describe it. So, for instance,
if you're calling a function,
and that's the whole thing that is in the line,
we used to underline the whole thing.
So we'll say, OK, even if the whole line is failing,
so it's not like a part of the line is failing,
the whole thing is failing, we used to underline that.
And that apparently is still on the PEP.
Maybe I should change that, because it's not
like that anymore.
Because someone suggested-- I mean, come on.
Like, if the whole line is failing,
underlining the whole line is actually not that useful.
And you're spending vertical space,
so you need to scroll a lot.
And at the beginning, I say, yeah, but this is inconsistent.
I don't like it.
and I pushed back a bit, but then more people say,
Pablo, you're wrong.
And then I say, OK, I'm wrong.
And we improve this further.
But don't take this as advice.
Don't tell me that I'm wrong collectively, please.
But right, so now if the whole line is underlined,
we don't underline it, because it doesn't really
add any new information.
So only if a part of the line contains the error,
not the whole line. So this means that we are not going to consume a lot of vertical
space for no reason. And the last thing I wanted to say is that there is some people
somewhere in the universe that may care about that extra disk space on their PYC files or
they just really, really hate squiggles. I don't know if that is even physically possible,
but there are very different and diverse set of people. So if you are one of those, there
is a collection of different ways you can deactivate this feature. There is an
environment variable with a super long name and there is a -x option when
you launch the interpreter so you can say Python -x something something I
don't know how it's called I think it's called null debug ranges. What about that?
What an incredible naming. And then you set null debug ranges to 1 and it
It deactivates the feature, incredible, like magic.
It's gone and you can reclaim your PYC files
and you can even generate PYC files
without this information if when you're compiling PYC files
you set this evil environment, but don't do that,
listeners, don't do that, it's evil, don't do that.
Just use it, it's great.
- Yeah.
- There's another kind of type of errors
that I think we're gonna get is about edge cases
where the compiler doesn't get the line numbers right,
because all these kind of fine-grained locations,
it's all new, and we're still adding up.
- There is a front-future, I think,
that you put a bunch of things with the front-future,
it just complains on a random place.
- Yeah, today I found that one,
but I've been looking at the compiler
and line numbers, location information,
and it's a bit off here and there,
And we have received bug reports from other people as well.
If the range here doesn't look right,
the range here looks too broad.
So yeah, we're gonna be ironing that out,
I guess for 3.12.
- Yeah, it's really nice when people are using betas
and release candidates though,
because we were able to catch a lot of those
before the release, because there were a couple people,
I forget exactly the name of the project,
but they were working on like a code animation tool
where it animates your code while it's running.
And they were using these new ranges
to identify AST notes and stuff.
And so they did this thing, I guess,
where they run their tool on the entire standard library
to make sure it's correct.
And so we got a bunch of bug reports
that basically say, oh, this column information
is off for this weird multi-line attribute access
or something.
- If you recall, I think you fixed an error.
That was super weird because it was like a method access,
like my instance of the form.
And if the method access has some vowel or something like that,
it was wrong.
And if you added some extra letter, it was fine.
And that was--
>>Yeah, it was like if you split your method access across two lines,
if you do like x.method or x.method or x.method on three lines or two lines
or something, the way we trace those lines,
we always trace the method when we're actually loading the method,
even if it's on a different line as like where the actual method load started.
And then we were doing some weird math to like figure out where the dot is.
So we would try to put it on the same line as the dot.
>> Yeah, that was insane.
>> So we would just like subtract one from the length of the name.
And so there was all sorts of crazy stuff that.
>> And that came from the grave because we fixed that.
And then it was wrong again because like we were like miscalculating the name.
Like it's just so much that is.
>> Oh my goodness.
>> Yeah, so all sorts of fun stuff like that.
>> Yeah, amazing.
Well, yeah, this is definitely one of the highlight features
for sure, and also the performance work
that you're all doing.
All right, we're getting very, very short on time.
So I think maybe a super, super lightning round here.
Let me just say we also got TomaLib support built in.
We've got the async.io task groups a la Trio Nurturies.
We've got new features for atomic grouping
and regular expressions.
Let's see.
A lot of type things have been added.
So we've got the self-type, Baryatric, Generics,
literal strings, which is very interesting.
Lucas did a talk about that on the release live stream.
Stuff for type dict and data class transformations.
So great stuff.
Now let's just really quickly round out.
What's the Python 3.11 story for HighScript, Pyodide?
Is there, do you have anyone out there know?
I don't know, I suppose it works.
- Tier two or tier three supported platform, right?
- Yeah, so Christian Himes is the unsung hero of TypeScript,
sorry, TypeScript, I'm sorry,
is the unsung hero of X, whatever, like the WASI thing,
so it's the WebAssembly, that's it, sorry.
I say all the things that were not that.
So he has been making a lot of improvements
to the build process, which is not easy,
so kudos to Christian Himes.
If you're listening, you're great.
And I suppose that PyScript can, through PyOlight,
this is how many layers is this?
So PyOlight through this can leverage all these improvements
because I don't know how is the whole layer
that we're thinking is working,
but PyOlight has a bunch of patches
that you need to modify CPython
so it builds nicely on WebAssembly platforms.
I don't know the details on that,
I just know that some of them are okayish,
Some of them are not okay and quite difficult to maintain.
And Christian Hanks has been making a lot of great effort
to change here and there, and put a lot of macros
and if-else and things like that.
So CPython builds easier.
This probably translates that PyLite, I hope,
kind of can consume this build in an easier way
with less patches, and I suppose that translates
into PyScript, just using the PyLite thing easier.
But yeah, I don't think that there is a huge amount
of improvements more than--
we are working towards official support,
as Bram was mentioning.
We have this new tier system.
It's super cool.
>>And as an unrelated fun fact, Mike Drapu,
one of the early developers of Pyotite,
is actually managing our team at Microsoft.
>>Oh, it's funny how the circle comes back around, indeed.
>>How the turntables.
- That's right.
All right, y'all, we are out of time, but super exciting.
I wish we had some champagne,
and Pablo, we didn't even bring hats
to celebrate Python 3.11,
but I know everyone out there is extremely excited.
- People cannot see, but I have a Python 3.11.
- Yes, yeah, it's a great new logo for 3.11 and stuff.
Not for, in general, but just for the release.
It's awesome.
All right, before we get out of here,
let me just ask you one final question,
and then we'll call it a show.
Notable PyPI package,
I simply want to give a shout out to,
we'll go top to bottom in the picture here, Pablo.
- Not all by a package.
- Yeah, yeah, some library.
- Bunch of spam.
And I'm going to say memory, use memory.
The one and only Python memory profiler.
Solve your problems on production today with memory.
- That and the underlying errors, you'll be all good.
- Exactly, yeah, what a combination.
- Arit, how about you?
- Well, I've had some interaction
with the author of bytecode recently,
because I was looking at things to do in the testing
and in the interpreter that are kind of like that.
So this is a library you can kind of
from Python write bytecode.
And it's pretty neat.
And it is struggling with zero cost exceptions,
but it is what it is.
- It's like a inline assembly, but for Python.
- Yeah, it's like from a Python script,
you can kind of write a bit of byte code
and get it to, I don't know,
do a lot of interesting stuff with it.
- That's awesome.
Brent, how about you?
- Well, I'm partial towards specialist,
but if I had to choose something else,
speaking of speed, I really like the scaling profiler.
I've been using it a lot of my own projects
and it's awesome.
I don't know how it's memory profiling compares to memory.
I'm sure memory is better, but scaling is really nice
for measuring the performance across both Python and C.
- Excellent, Mark.
- Well, it's not actually a PyPI package.
I was gonna say the sys module,
which is like the pretty much
the most fundamental module going.
But there's all sorts of fun things in there.
You can change the recursion limit and see,
you can muddle it.
If you're interested in how Python works,
it's actually quite a sort of fun thing to play with.
So cool.
Right on.
All right.
Well, thank you all for all the hard work.
And I know there are many people who did a ton of work as well, who are not on the
show here, but you can represent them as well.
So thanks all for being here.
final call to action.
People want to get started at three 11, you know, is what do you tell them?
Is it ready for them to get going?
What do you think?
It's awesome.
Yeah.
And also now 3.11 comes with a bunch of wheels
for all your packages because there has been a lot of good work
in the people of third-party libraries.
And now that people are using CI build wheel,
3.11 was released with wheels for NumPy and Pandas
and a bunch of other things that previously was failing massively
because nobody could compile them on their crappy laptop.
But now you don't need that. You can just download them and it works.
So just use 3.11. There is no reason.
- Yeah, that's excellent. - That's just boring.
That would be a reason, if you're boring
and you don't want to use 3.11, then don't use it.
- It didn't break anything, not even a package,
much less GitHub.
- Right. (laughs)
- And we need more benchmarks.
So that's how people can help us make things faster,
is more benchmarks.
So yeah, we have a,
there's a sort of standard Python performance suite,
but it's kind of a bunch of toy programs and so on.
So if you've got something that might make a nice benchmark,
some self-contained but realistic program,
then yeah, let us know.
>>All right.
Cool.
Well, thanks again.
Great work on it.
Cam Gerlach out in the audience says, yay, CI Build Wheel.
Yeah, absolutely.
Great stuff.
So thanks again, everyone.
I'm super excited to start in 3.11 myself.
So yeah, it's great to have you here.
Thank you.
Bye all.
Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]